README.md, before:

# Project 0: Get started with Mininet and Topology Configurations

## Objectives

* Get familiar with the experiment environment: Mininiet, Topology configurations, controller, etc.
* Create your own circle topology
* Run example applications on the simple topology and learn how to read their performance numbers

## Tutorial: The line topology example

To start this tutorial, you will first need to get the [infrastructure setup](https://github.com/minlanyu/cs145-site/blob/spring2023/infra.md) and clone this repository with submodules
```
git clone --recurse-submodules <your repository>
```

Run `./pull_update.sh` to pull project updates (if any). You might need to merge conflicts manually: most of the time, you just need to accept incoming changes; reach to TF if it is hard to merge. This step also applies to all subsequent projects. 


### Networking terms

We start by defining a few networking terms used in this project. Note that the description here is not precise but just a way for you to understand the problem. You will learn the actual meanings of the terms after a few lectures in the class. For now, you can imagine a *topology* just as a graph, where *switches* and *hosts* are nodes in the graph, and they are connected by *links*. *Hosts* are those nodes at the edge of the graph. They can generate traffic and run applications. *Switches* are internal nodes in the graph that connect *hosts* or *switches* together. *Port* indicates the end of each link at a *node*.  

The job of networking is to deliver messages along a path of multiple nodes to finally reach the destination. This is a distributed process. That is, every node in the graph independently decide where to *forward* messages and together they deliver the message to the destination. To achieve this, each node will decide locally which *port* (i.e., link) to send the message based on its destination. This is called a *forwarding rule*. Your job would be program the forwarding rules. 

### Create the line topology in Mininet

Let's first create the physical topology of the network in [Mininet](http://mininet.org/). The Mininet program automatically creates a virtual topology based on a *JSON configuration file*.
The JSON configuration file should:
- Define hosts and switches.
- Define the links, i.e., how hosts and switches connect with each other to form your topology.

As an example, we provide you with a line topology in the file `topology/p4app_line.json`. 
The line topology has three hosts ("h1", "h2" and "h3") and three switches ("s1", "s2", and "s3"). There are five links: one connecting "h1" and "s1", "h2" and "s2", "h3" and "s3", "s1" and "s2", "s2" and "s3".

<img src="./figures/line_topo.png" width="500">

In this configuration file `topology/p4app_line.json`, `topology` includes `assignment_strategy`, `links`, `hosts`, and `switches`. The `assignment_strategy` indicates all the switches run at layer 2 (`l2`). We put the three hosts in the `hosts` subfield, and put the three switches in the `switches` subfield. We also put the five links in the `links` subfield.

**Run Mininet with the topology**
```
sudo p4run --config topology/p4app_line.json
```
You will see the `mininet>` prompt if the command ran successfully.
You can choose different `json` files for differnet topologies.

**Verify your topology**
In the Mininet CLI, you can check out the nodes and links you create by running the following commands:

- `nodes`: list all the hosts and switches you just created.
- `net`: list all the links you just created. For example,

    ```
    h1 h1-eth0:t1-eth1
    # h1-eth0 means port 0 of host h1. t1-eth1 means port 1 of switch t1. The two ports are connected.
    a1 lo:  a1-eth1:t1-eth3 a1-eth2:t2-eth3 a1-eth3:c1-eth1 a1-eth4:c2-eth1
    # e.g., a1-eth1 means port1 of switch a1, which is connected to t1-eth3, i.e., the port3 of switch t1
    ```

- `links`: list all the links you just created.
- `help`: list all the supported commands.
- `exit`: quit the Mininet CLI.

For more information on how to use Mininet and other useful commands you can check out the [walkthough](http://mininet.org/walkthrough/) and [Mininet documentation](https://github.com/mininet/mininet/wiki/Documentation).


### Create networking software to run on the topology

There are two pieces of software that can control traffic in the topology. The first is a *controller program*, which is responsible of running routing algorithms, generating forwarding rules, and installing the rules into the tables at switches. The second is a *p4 program* that specifies packet processing logics at switches.  
For the line topology, we provide the controller program at `controller/controller_line.py` and the p4 program at `p4src/l2fwd.p4`. We do not need to touch the p4 program in this project. Basically, the p4 program defines a **dmac** table which maps the destination MAC address to the output port. 

Now let's delve more into the controller code. The controller implements the `route` function which installs entries in Table *dmac* to forward traffic. The table includes a group of *forwarding rules* that tell a node which *port* to send the traffic based on the destination (*MAC address*).
Our controller file already implemented some small functions that use the `Topology` and `SimpleSwitchAPI` objects from the `p4utils library` (this library locates in `/home/p4/p4-tools/p4-utils/README.md`, and you can also check the library in this [online site](https://github.com/minlanyu/cs145-site/blob/master/p4-utils/README.md)). 
At a high level, the `route` function uses `table_add` function to insert forwarding rules. 
```
def table_add(self, table_name, action_name, match_keys, action_params=[], prio=None):
        "Add entry to a match table: table_add <table name> <action name> <match fields> => <action parameters> [priority]"
```
(You can find other functions and their definitions at [here](https://github.com/minlanyu/cs145-site/blob/master/p4-utils/p4utils/utils/runtime_API.py#L920), you can also check `/home/p4/p4-tools/p4-utils/p4utils/utils/runtime_API.py#L920` locally if you are curious).

For example, 
```
controller.table_add("dmac", "forward", ["00:00:0a:00:00:01"], ["1"])
```
This line adds a rule in the `dmac` table, with the `forward` action. The rule says that if you receive a packet whose destination MAC address `dmac` is `"00:00:0a:00:00:01"`, `forward` the packet to port `"1"`.

In Mininet, by default hosts get assigned MAC addresses using the following pattern: `00:00:<IP address to hex>`. For example if h1 IP's address were `10.0.1.5` the MAC address would be: `00:00:0a:00:01:05`. The default IP address of host hX is `10.0.0.X`.

To find out the port mappings for each switch, you can check the messages printed by when running the `p4run` command:
	
```
Switch port mapping:
s1:  1:h1	2:h2
```

You can also find out the port mappings using the `links` or  `net` CLI commands in the mininet terminal:

```
mininet> links
h1-eth0<->s1-eth1 (OK OK) 
h2-eth0<->s2-eth1 (OK OK) 
h3-eth0<->s3-eth1 (OK OK) 
s1-eth2<->s2-eth2 (OK OK) 
s2-eth3<->s3-eth2 (OK OK) 
```

**Run the controller**

You should start by setting up the topology by running the above *p4run* command. Then start *another* terminal, and run
```
./controller/controller_line.py
```

**Verify your controller**
If your controller installs routing rules successfully, hosts should be able to communicate with each other. 
To test the connectivity between all pairs of hosts, you can run the following commands in Mininet CLI 
- `pingall`: ping between any host pair
If `pingall` fails, you will see prompt stopped. (ctrl + c will kill the `pingall` command).

For debugging, you can also run:
- `h1 ping h2`: ping h2 from h1, to test the connectivity between two hosts
- `h1 <commands>`: run a command on host h1.

## Your Task: Build the Circle Topology

In this project, your task is to build the circle topology in `topology/p4app_circle.json` as shown in the following figure.
<img src="./figures/circle_topo.png" width="500">

You **only** need to write your own code in places marked with a ``TODO`` (ie, the `topology` field). 

Next, you need to write forwarding rules for the circle topology in `controller/controller_circle.json`. You **only** need to write your own code in places marked with a ``TODO`` (i.e., within the `route` function). 

### Testing
You can test your solution in the following steps:
1. Start the topology
	```
	sudo p4run --config topology/p4app_circle.json
	```
2. Run the controller
	```
	./controller/controller_circle.py
	```
3. We provide you with a testing script in `test_scripts/test_circle_topo.py`. Run it and your network should pass all tests.
	```
	./test_scripts/test_circle_topo.py
	```

## Running Applications on your network

Note: The "resources" folder used in this experiment can be downloaded [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1724mIIyNezMSBW4GTXOz-k1Efx49iqgD/view?usp=share_link).

These applications will also be used in future projects.

Although you are running a network in your laptop, you can run networked applications on the hosts as if you are running a real network. Here we introduce three applications that are representative for data center traffic: video streaming, Memcached and Iperf. The goal here is for you to get familiar with these applications so that we can use them to evaluate our network design in futurre projects.

Video streaming runs a server with video files. Any client can connect to the video server to get the video streams.

Memcached is an in-memory key-value store system, which distributes key-value pairs across different servers. Memcached mainly has two operations: `set` and `get`. Usually the key-value pair is a very short message, and thus for each operation, the system only generates a short TCP message, which makes the TCP flow short (less than 200 Byte). For more information, please refer to [Memcached website](http://memcached.org/). 

Iperf is a measurement tool for measuring IP network bandwidth. We usually run Iperf in two servers, and let those two servers to send packets as fast as possible, so that Iperf could measure the maximum bandwidth between the two servers. For more information, please refer to [Iperf website](https://iperf.fr/).

These applications are representative networked applications. Memcached represents those applications that have lots of small messages; while video streaming and iperf send long persistent flows.

### Video streaming
> _Note: To avoid GUI/X11 Forwarding issues, please run the video streaming client directly in the VM._

**Start a video streaming server at host `h1`**
```
./apps/start_vid_server.sh h1 10.0.0.1 
```
This command starts a video streaming server at host `h1`, and the IP address of `h1` is `10.0.0.1`. 

**Open the terminal for host `h2` in the mininet terminal**

Note that for video streaming, you need to run mininet in graphical interface. 
```
mininet> xterm h2
```
You will see another terminal (xterm) popped up, which belongs to host `h2`.

**Start the client for `h2` at xterm**

In the terminal popped up, type:
```
./apps/start_vid_client.sh h2 10.0.0.1
```
This command opens a Chrome web browser on host `h2` which visits a video website served on `10.0.0.1`. If you ran your server on a host other than `h1`, then change `10.0.0.1` to that IP.
Try playing the video. You should see something like this:

<img src="./figures/video.png" width="600">

**Video streaming performance**

You can try testing out how the performance of the video stream changes as you increase and decrease the link bandwidth.
You can set the link bandwidth in the topology configuration file as follows
```
"topology": {
    "assignment_strategy": "l2",
    "links": [["h1", "s1", {"bw": 1}], ["h2", "s2", {"bw": 1}], ["h3", "s3", {"bw": 1}], ["s1", "s2", {"bw": 1}], ["s2", "s3", {"bw": 1}]],
    ...
}
```
The `bw` field defines the link bandwidth, whose unit is Mbps.

How do the buffer level and the bandwidth change over time for 100 Kbps, 1 Mbps, 2 Mbps and 4 Mbps? When do you start to see the video quality drop?

### Memcached


Memcached server is a software that provides a service to store and retrieve data in memory, using a key-value pair structure. Clients, on the other hand, are applications that connect to the Memcached server to store and retrieve data. In the following experiment, we will build a memcached server on `h2`, providing services for `h1`.

In order to start the server and client, first, you can access terminals for `h1` and `h2`
```
mininet> xterm h1
```
```
mininet> xterm h2
```
In `h2` terminal, we start the memcached server, for example:
```
memcached -u p4 -m 100
```
After `h2` memcached server is up, for `h1` terminal, you can connect to `h2` memcached service port in telnet protocol by
```
telnet 10.0.0.2 11211
```
After the connection is established, you can store data to `h2`, for example
```
set CS145 0 900 9
```
```
memcached
```
Then you will see a "STORED" output message from your terminal. After that, you can try retrieving the data by
```
get CS145
```
Then you can see the data you stored before. Now we try to get some data that do not exist in the server
```
get CS243
```
You can see an "END" output message because no data is returned. 
### Iperf

Iperf is a tool that measures the bandwidth between two hosts. 

To run iperf, first, you can access terminals for `h1` and `h2`
```
mininet> xterm h1
```
```
mininet> xterm h2
```
In `h1` terminal, you can start the iperf server, for example
```
iperf -s
```
And for `h2` terminal, you can start the iperf client and send traffic to `h1`
```
iperf -c 10.0.0.1
```
After finishing iperf, you will get the bandwidth results from the application output. Similar to the streaming application, you can adjust the bandwidth to see if the iperf result differs. 

## Debugging and Troubleshooting

Here's a brief introduction on how to read switch logs. You can also check out more debugging and troubleshooting tips [here](debug.md).
**These debugging tips will be useful for all future projects. Please come back and revisit this in future projects**

Each p4 switch provides a log file for debugging. Those files are located in the `log` directory.
Within this directory, you can see files named `sX.log`, which indicates this file is the log file for switch `sX`.
The log file records all operations happen within this switch.
You only need to focus on two kinds of records: adding table entry and packet processing.

When you use your controller script to add table entry in the P4 switch, there will be some words in the log file:
```
[11:18:35.237] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15987] bm_table_add_entry
[11:18:35.237] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15987] Entry 0 added to table 'MyIngress.dmac'
[11:18:35.237] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15987] Dumping entry 0
Match key:
* hdr.ethernet.dstAddr: EXACT     00000a000001
Action entry: MyIngress.forward - 1
```
which means you add a table entry, whose key is the destination MAC address `00000a000001`, and the action is `forward(1)`.

After the switch processes a packet, there will also be some words in the log file:
```
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Processing packet received on port 2
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser 'parser': start
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser 'parser' entering state 'start'
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Extracting header 'ethernet'
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser state 'start' has no switch, going to default next state
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Bytes parsed: 14
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser 'parser': end
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'ingress': start
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Applying table 'MyIngress.dmac'
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Looking up key:
* hdr.ethernet.dstAddr: 00000a000001

[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Table 'MyIngress.dmac': hit with handle 0
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Dumping entry 0
Match key:
* hdr.ethernet.dstAddr: EXACT     00000a000001
Action entry: MyIngress.forward - 1,

[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Action entry is MyIngress.forward - 1,
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Action MyIngress.forward
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] p4src/line_topo.p4(72) Primitive standard_metadata.egress_spec = egress_port
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'ingress': end
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Egress port is 1
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'egress': start
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'egress': end
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Deparser 'deparser': start
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Deparsing header 'ethernet'
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Deparser 'deparser': end
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15860] [14.0] [cxt 0] Transmitting packet of size 74 out of port 1
```
which describes how the P4 switch processes this packet.

## Submission and Grading

### What to Submit

You are expected to submit the following files. Please make sure all files are in the root of your git branch.
- `topology/p4app_circle.json`. This file describes the topology you build.
- `controller/controller_circle.py`. This file contains how you insert forwarding rules into P4 switches.
- `report/report.md`. Please write the description of your work in `report/report.md` file (the `report` directory locates at the root directory of project 0). The description includes:
	- How do you write forwarding rules in the `controller/controller_circle.py` file, and why do those rules work to enable communications between each pair of hosts.
	- After running the applications, you can get the evaluation results. Please run these applications on all hosts, i.e., on host `h1-h3`. You will get the average throughput of iperf and the streaming throughput from the video application. Write these evaluation results in this file.

You are expected to use Github Classroom to submit your project. 
After completing a file, e.g., the `topology/p4app_circle.json` file, you can submit this file by using the following commands:
```
git commit topology/p4app_circle.json -m "COMMIT MESSAGE" # please use a reasonable commit message, especially if you are submitting code
git push origin main # push the code to the remote github repository
```

### Grading
This project do not grade. 

### Survey

Please fill up the survey when you finish your project.

[Survey link](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf5l5XFowublpGOJB6uja5j_5uYW05YfAocjEOOw45ZWqoDrg/viewform?usp=pp_url)

Commit message:

add memcached pre-install instructions

README.md, after:

# Project 0: Get started with Mininet and Topology Configurations

## Objectives

* Get familiar with the experiment environment: Mininiet, Topology configurations, controller, etc.
* Create your own circle topology
* Run example applications on the simple topology and learn how to read their performance numbers

## Tutorial: The line topology example

To start this tutorial, you will first need to get the [infrastructure setup](https://github.com/minlanyu/cs145-site/blob/spring2023/infra.md) and clone this repository with submodules
```
git clone --recurse-submodules <your repository>
```

Run `./pull_update.sh` to pull project updates (if any). You might need to merge conflicts manually: most of the time, you just need to accept incoming changes; reach to TF if it is hard to merge. This step also applies to all subsequent projects. 


### Networking terms

We start by defining a few networking terms used in this project. Note that the description here is not precise but just a way for you to understand the problem. You will learn the actual meanings of the terms after a few lectures in the class. For now, you can imagine a *topology* just as a graph, where *switches* and *hosts* are nodes in the graph, and they are connected by *links*. *Hosts* are those nodes at the edge of the graph. They can generate traffic and run applications. *Switches* are internal nodes in the graph that connect *hosts* or *switches* together. *Port* indicates the end of each link at a *node*.  

The job of networking is to deliver messages along a path of multiple nodes to finally reach the destination. This is a distributed process. That is, every node in the graph independently decide where to *forward* messages and together they deliver the message to the destination. To achieve this, each node will decide locally which *port* (i.e., link) to send the message based on its destination. This is called a *forwarding rule*. Your job would be program the forwarding rules. 

### Create the line topology in Mininet

Let's first create the physical topology of the network in [Mininet](http://mininet.org/). The Mininet program automatically creates a virtual topology based on a *JSON configuration file*.
The JSON configuration file should:
- Define hosts and switches.
- Define the links, i.e., how hosts and switches connect with each other to form your topology.

As an example, we provide you with a line topology in the file `topology/p4app_line.json`. 
The line topology has three hosts ("h1", "h2" and "h3") and three switches ("s1", "s2", and "s3"). There are five links: one connecting "h1" and "s1", "h2" and "s2", "h3" and "s3", "s1" and "s2", "s2" and "s3".

<img src="./figures/line_topo.png" width="500">

In this configuration file `topology/p4app_line.json`, `topology` includes `assignment_strategy`, `links`, `hosts`, and `switches`. The `assignment_strategy` indicates all the switches run at layer 2 (`l2`). We put the three hosts in the `hosts` subfield, and put the three switches in the `switches` subfield. We also put the five links in the `links` subfield.

**Run Mininet with the topology**
```
sudo p4run --config topology/p4app_line.json
```
You will see the `mininet>` prompt if the command ran successfully.
You can choose different `json` files for differnet topologies.

**Verify your topology**
In the Mininet CLI, you can check out the nodes and links you create by running the following commands:

- `nodes`: list all the hosts and switches you just created.
- `net`: list all the links you just created. For example,

    ```
    h1 h1-eth0:t1-eth1
    # h1-eth0 means port 0 of host h1. t1-eth1 means port 1 of switch t1. The two ports are connected.
    a1 lo:  a1-eth1:t1-eth3 a1-eth2:t2-eth3 a1-eth3:c1-eth1 a1-eth4:c2-eth1
    # e.g., a1-eth1 means port1 of switch a1, which is connected to t1-eth3, i.e., the port3 of switch t1
    ```

- `links`: list all the links you just created.
- `help`: list all the supported commands.
- `exit`: quit the Mininet CLI.

For more information on how to use Mininet and other useful commands you can check out the [walkthough](http://mininet.org/walkthrough/) and [Mininet documentation](https://github.com/mininet/mininet/wiki/Documentation).


### Create networking software to run on the topology

There are two pieces of software that can control traffic in the topology. The first is a *controller program*, which is responsible of running routing algorithms, generating forwarding rules, and installing the rules into the tables at switches. The second is a *p4 program* that specifies packet processing logics at switches.  
For the line topology, we provide the controller program at `controller/controller_line.py` and the p4 program at `p4src/l2fwd.p4`. We do not need to touch the p4 program in this project. Basically, the p4 program defines a **dmac** table which maps the destination MAC address to the output port. 

Now let's delve more into the controller code. The controller implements the `route` function which installs entries in Table *dmac* to forward traffic. The table includes a group of *forwarding rules* that tell a node which *port* to send the traffic based on the destination (*MAC address*).
Our controller file already implemented some small functions that use the `Topology` and `SimpleSwitchAPI` objects from the `p4utils library` (this library locates in `/home/p4/p4-tools/p4-utils/README.md`, and you can also check the library in this [online site](https://github.com/minlanyu/cs145-site/blob/master/p4-utils/README.md)). 
At a high level, the `route` function uses `table_add` function to insert forwarding rules. 
```
def table_add(self, table_name, action_name, match_keys, action_params=[], prio=None):
        "Add entry to a match table: table_add <table name> <action name> <match fields> => <action parameters> [priority]"
```
(You can find other functions and their definitions at [here](https://github.com/minlanyu/cs145-site/blob/master/p4-utils/p4utils/utils/runtime_API.py#L920), you can also check `/home/p4/p4-tools/p4-utils/p4utils/utils/runtime_API.py#L920` locally if you are curious).

For example, 
```
controller.table_add("dmac", "forward", ["00:00:0a:00:00:01"], ["1"])
```
This line adds a rule in the `dmac` table, with the `forward` action. The rule says that if you receive a packet whose destination MAC address `dmac` is `"00:00:0a:00:00:01"`, `forward` the packet to port `"1"`.

In Mininet, by default hosts get assigned MAC addresses using the following pattern: `00:00:<IP address to hex>`. For example if h1 IP's address were `10.0.1.5` the MAC address would be: `00:00:0a:00:01:05`. The default IP address of host hX is `10.0.0.X`.

To find out the port mappings for each switch, you can check the messages printed by when running the `p4run` command:
	
```
Switch port mapping:
s1:  1:h1	2:h2
```

You can also find out the port mappings using the `links` or  `net` CLI commands in the mininet terminal:

```
mininet> links
h1-eth0<->s1-eth1 (OK OK) 
h2-eth0<->s2-eth1 (OK OK) 
h3-eth0<->s3-eth1 (OK OK) 
s1-eth2<->s2-eth2 (OK OK) 
s2-eth3<->s3-eth2 (OK OK) 
```

**Run the controller**

You should start by setting up the topology by running the above *p4run* command. Then start *another* terminal, and run
```
./controller/controller_line.py
```

**Verify your controller**
If your controller installs routing rules successfully, hosts should be able to communicate with each other. 
To test the connectivity between all pairs of hosts, you can run the following commands in Mininet CLI 
- `pingall`: ping between any host pair
If `pingall` fails, you will see prompt stopped. (ctrl + c will kill the `pingall` command).

For debugging, you can also run:
- `h1 ping h2`: ping h2 from h1, to test the connectivity between two hosts
- `h1 <commands>`: run a command on host h1.

## Your Task: Build the Circle Topology

In this project, your task is to build the circle topology in `topology/p4app_circle.json` as shown in the following figure.
<img src="./figures/circle_topo.png" width="500">

You **only** need to write your own code in places marked with a ``TODO`` (ie, the `topology` field). 

Next, you need to write forwarding rules for the circle topology in `controller/controller_circle.json`. You **only** need to write your own code in places marked with a ``TODO`` (i.e., within the `route` function). 

### Testing
You can test your solution in the following steps:
1. Start the topology
	```
	sudo p4run --config topology/p4app_circle.json
	```
2. Run the controller
	```
	./controller/controller_circle.py
	```
3. We provide you with a testing script in `test_scripts/test_circle_topo.py`. Run it and your network should pass all tests.
	```
	./test_scripts/test_circle_topo.py
	```

## Running Applications on your network

Note: The "resources" folder used in this experiment can be downloaded [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1724mIIyNezMSBW4GTXOz-k1Efx49iqgD/view?usp=share_link).

These applications will also be used in future projects.

Although you are running a network in your laptop, you can run networked applications on the hosts as if you are running a real network. Here we introduce three applications that are representative for data center traffic: video streaming, Memcached and Iperf. The goal here is for you to get familiar with these applications so that we can use them to evaluate our network design in futurre projects.

Video streaming runs a server with video files. Any client can connect to the video server to get the video streams.

Memcached is an in-memory key-value store system, which distributes key-value pairs across different servers. Memcached mainly has two operations: `set` and `get`. Usually the key-value pair is a very short message, and thus for each operation, the system only generates a short TCP message, which makes the TCP flow short (less than 200 Byte). For more information, please refer to [Memcached website](http://memcached.org/). 

Iperf is a measurement tool for measuring IP network bandwidth. We usually run Iperf in two servers, and let those two servers to send packets as fast as possible, so that Iperf could measure the maximum bandwidth between the two servers. For more information, please refer to [Iperf website](https://iperf.fr/).

These applications are representative networked applications. Memcached represents those applications that have lots of small messages; while video streaming and iperf send long persistent flows.

### Video streaming
> _Note: To avoid GUI/X11 Forwarding issues, please run the video streaming client directly in the VM._

**Start a video streaming server at host `h1`**
```
./apps/start_vid_server.sh h1 10.0.0.1 
```
This command starts a video streaming server at host `h1`, and the IP address of `h1` is `10.0.0.1`. 

**Open the terminal for host `h2` in the mininet terminal**

Note that for video streaming, you need to run mininet in graphical interface. 
```
mininet> xterm h2
```
You will see another terminal (xterm) popped up, which belongs to host `h2`.

**Start the client for `h2` at xterm**

In the terminal popped up, type:
```
./apps/start_vid_client.sh h2 10.0.0.1
```
This command opens a Chrome web browser on host `h2` which visits a video website served on `10.0.0.1`. If you ran your server on a host other than `h1`, then change `10.0.0.1` to that IP.
Try playing the video. You should see something like this:

<img src="./figures/video.png" width="600">

**Video streaming performance**

You can try testing out how the performance of the video stream changes as you increase and decrease the link bandwidth.
You can set the link bandwidth in the topology configuration file as follows
```
"topology": {
    "assignment_strategy": "l2",
    "links": [["h1", "s1", {"bw": 1}], ["h2", "s2", {"bw": 1}], ["h3", "s3", {"bw": 1}], ["s1", "s2", {"bw": 1}], ["s2", "s3", {"bw": 1}]],
    ...
}
```
The `bw` field defines the link bandwidth, whose unit is Mbps.

How do the buffer level and the bandwidth change over time for 100 Kbps, 1 Mbps, 2 Mbps and 4 Mbps? When do you start to see the video quality drop?

### Memcached

Memcached server is a software that provides a service to store and retrieve data in memory, using a key-value pair structure. Clients, on the other hand, are applications that connect to the Memcached server to store and retrieve data. In the following experiment, we will build a memcached server on `h2`, providing services for `h1`.

> You might need to install memcached if it's not pre-installed on your VM.
```
sudo apt install memcached
pip install memcache
```

In order to start the server and client, first, you can access terminals for `h1` and `h2`
```
mininet> xterm h1
```
```
mininet> xterm h2
```
In `h2` terminal, we start the memcached server, for example:
```
memcached -u p4 -m 100
```
After `h2` memcached server is up, for `h1` terminal, you can connect to `h2` memcached service port in telnet protocol by
```
telnet 10.0.0.2 11211
```
After the connection is established, you can store data to `h2`, for example
```
set CS145 0 900 9
```
```
memcached
```
Then you will see a "STORED" output message from your terminal. After that, you can try retrieving the data by
```
get CS145
```
Then you can see the data you stored before. Now we try to get some data that do not exist in the server
```
get CS243
```
You can see an "END" output message because no data is returned. 
### Iperf

Iperf is a tool that measures the bandwidth between two hosts. 

To run iperf, first, you can access terminals for `h1` and `h2`
```
mininet> xterm h1
```
```
mininet> xterm h2
```
In `h1` terminal, you can start the iperf server, for example
```
iperf -s
```
And for `h2` terminal, you can start the iperf client and send traffic to `h1`
```
iperf -c 10.0.0.1
```
After finishing iperf, you will get the bandwidth results from the application output. Similar to the streaming application, you can adjust the bandwidth to see if the iperf result differs. 

## Debugging and Troubleshooting

Here's a brief introduction on how to read switch logs. You can also check out more debugging and troubleshooting tips [here](debug.md).
**These debugging tips will be useful for all future projects. Please come back and revisit this in future projects**

Each p4 switch provides a log file for debugging. Those files are located in the `log` directory.
Within this directory, you can see files named `sX.log`, which indicates this file is the log file for switch `sX`.
The log file records all operations happen within this switch.
You only need to focus on two kinds of records: adding table entry and packet processing.

When you use your controller script to add table entry in the P4 switch, there will be some words in the log file:
```
[11:18:35.237] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15987] bm_table_add_entry
[11:18:35.237] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15987] Entry 0 added to table 'MyIngress.dmac'
[11:18:35.237] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15987] Dumping entry 0
Match key:
* hdr.ethernet.dstAddr: EXACT     00000a000001
Action entry: MyIngress.forward - 1
```
which means you add a table entry, whose key is the destination MAC address `00000a000001`, and the action is `forward(1)`.

After the switch processes a packet, there will also be some words in the log file:
```
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Processing packet received on port 2
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser 'parser': start
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser 'parser' entering state 'start'
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Extracting header 'ethernet'
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser state 'start' has no switch, going to default next state
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Bytes parsed: 14
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Parser 'parser': end
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'ingress': start
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Applying table 'MyIngress.dmac'
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Looking up key:
* hdr.ethernet.dstAddr: 00000a000001

[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Table 'MyIngress.dmac': hit with handle 0
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Dumping entry 0
Match key:
* hdr.ethernet.dstAddr: EXACT     00000a000001
Action entry: MyIngress.forward - 1,

[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Action entry is MyIngress.forward - 1,
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Action MyIngress.forward
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [T] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] p4src/line_topo.p4(72) Primitive standard_metadata.egress_spec = egress_port
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'ingress': end
[11:19:01.206] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15855] [14.0] [cxt 0] Egress port is 1
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'egress': start
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Pipeline 'egress': end
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Deparser 'deparser': start
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Deparsing header 'ethernet'
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15857] [14.0] [cxt 0] Deparser 'deparser': end
[11:19:01.207] [bmv2] [D] [thread 15860] [14.0] [cxt 0] Transmitting packet of size 74 out of port 1
```
which describes how the P4 switch processes this packet.

## Submission and Grading

### What to Submit

You are expected to submit the following files. Please make sure all files are in the root of your git branch.
- `topology/p4app_circle.json`. This file describes the topology you build.
- `controller/controller_circle.py`. This file contains how you insert forwarding rules into P4 switches.
- `report/report.md`. Please write the description of your work in `report/report.md` file (the `report` directory locates at the root directory of project 0). The description includes:
	- How do you write forwarding rules in the `controller/controller_circle.py` file, and why do those rules work to enable communications between each pair of hosts.
	- After running the applications, you can get the evaluation results. Please run these applications on all hosts, i.e., on host `h1-h3`. You will get the average throughput of iperf and the streaming throughput from the video application. Write these evaluation results in this file.

You are expected to use Github Classroom to submit your project. 
After completing a file, e.g., the `topology/p4app_circle.json` file, you can submit this file by using the following commands:
```
git commit topology/p4app_circle.json -m "COMMIT MESSAGE" # please use a reasonable commit message, especially if you are submitting code
git push origin main # push the code to the remote github repository
```

### Grading
This project do not grade. 

### Survey

Please fill up the survey when you finish your project.

[Survey link](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf5l5XFowublpGOJB6uja5j_5uYW05YfAocjEOOw45ZWqoDrg/viewform?usp=pp_url)
